DRAGON: /In a land of myth
and a time of magic,
the destiny of a great kingdom
rests on the shoulders of a young boy.
His name, Merlin.
Halt!
(MUMBLING)
-What are you saying?
-Bandits...
(SWORD SWISHING)
(MEN EXCLAIMING)
(HORSE NEIGHING)
Always watch your back.
(SHUDDERING)
Didn't they teach you that?
Well? Aren't you going to beg
for your life?
A Knight of Camelot does not beg.
-Indulge me.
-I'd rather die.
Who am I to deny a man
his last request.
(GROANING)
We must go if we are
to make Camelot by nightfall.
(THUNDER CRASHING)
All clear.
Carry on.
MORDRED: Take the north door.
Straight ahead. Keep going.
(GASPS)
Keep going, keep going...
(MORDRED TALKING INDISTINCTLY)
Keep going, hurry!
Halt!
(CHANTING)
(SOLDIERS SCREAMING)
MORDRED: Keep going.
It's not much further now.
(BREATHING HEAVILY)
Wait in the forest of Brechfa
by the fork on the north ridge.
Are you ready?
(PANTING)
MORDRED: We're nearly there.
Be careful...
Guards at the end of the corridor.
Morgana's chamber is next.
(CHANTING)
MORDRED: Morgana.
Mordred.
(BELL TOLLING)
What do mean you lost them?
They could be dangerous.
MERLIN: Ow!
-Merlin.
-(STRUGGLING) Morgana's chamber...
-Oh, sorry.
-Morgana... (PANTING)
They're in Morgana's chambers!
| thought
I'd never see you again.
| found the boy
wandering in the woods.
Lost and alone.
Hunted by Uther's men...
-Who are you?
-My name is Alvarr.
| too have been
hunted by Uther since I was a child.
-You have magic?
-Yes, my Lady.
As did my parents.
And their parents before them.
They were fortunate to live
in a time of peace.
Before your King
declared war on sorcery.
| too have known
Uther's cruelty.
Magic is not a crime.
It is a gift.
| wish to walk
free and without fear.
The boy said you
would understand.
What are you doing in Camelot?
You take a great risk in coming here.
We came to see you.
-Are you sure about this?
-Definitely.
- Saw them with my own eyes.
-What were you doing there?
-I heard voices in my...
-In your...
In my chambers.
And I thought I should investigate.
-Frankly, Merlin, it's hard to believe.
-I...
For once you've shown
some real initiative.
| will not stand by
and watch innocent people destroyed.
And I am not alone.
Many have already joined me.
-Many more join every day.
-However, this is a war you can't win.
Uther has an army
at his disposal.
Doesn't matter
how many you are,
if you wield a weapon
powerful enough.
When I was a child my
parents told me of a crystal.
It was taken from the sorcerers
in the last days of The Great Purge.
Taken? By Uther?
It is here in Camelot.
-Locked within the vaults beneath us.
-The vaults are impregnable.
-You could never get it out.
-No, I could not.
But you could.
-Me?
-You are the King's ward.
No one would suspect you.
Morgana,
you are our only hope.
(FOOTSTEPS APPROACHING)
What on Earth
do you think you're doing?
| had reason to believe
that there was an intruder in here.
Right now, Arthur,
the only intruder is you.
Camelot has been infiltrated.
-Didn't you not hear the warning bell?
-Of course I did!
Was hoping
I'd be safe in my chambers.
Well, if you'll just permit me
to search your room.
You'll do no such thing!
Do you really think that
if there was someone in my room
| wouldn't know about it?
Please accept my apologies.
-I don't understand.
-Oh.
I'm sorry, Merlin,
which bit didn't you understand?
The making a fool out of me,
or making a fool out of yourself?
There was someone in there.
| know there was.
Word of advice, Merlin. In the
future, stick to what you do best,
nothing!
-We owe you our lives, my Lady.
-You're safe for now.
But Uther'll not rest
until he's found and killed you both.
-You will help us, then?
-Please, Morgana. We need you.
Yes. I will. Of course I will.
(BELL TOLLING)
-Late night?
-You could say that.
| hear there was a disturbance,
an intruder in the city.
Yeah,
| heard talking in my head.
They had magic?
| recognized the voice.
It was Mordred.
The Druid boy?
What's he doing here?
He was guiding someone
to Morgana's chambers.
Are you sure?
She and the boy
had a kind of bond.
Yeah, but this,
is about more than that.
-What do you mean?
-What if they'd been caught?
Whatever they were doing,
they were prepared to die for it.
-Merlin, I was looking for Arthur.
-He's out training.
-Of course.
-Yeah. He trains every day.
Same time. Same place.
| just wanted to apologize
for last night.
Another time, perhaps.
-Come on, Merlin! I'm starving.
-You know what they say,
good food takes
time to prepare!
And this taste sensation
took exactly how long?
-Nearly five minutes.
-Really? Five minutes.
You need that long, you see,
to let it thicken.
Thicken.
(BELLS TOLLING)
The Crystal of Neahtid.
The locks are not damaged.
What does that tell you?
It tells me that somebody
stole my keys.
-Was it precious, this crystal?
-Of course it was precious!
It wouldn't been
down here otherwise, would it?
-Right.
-Whoever it was,
knew exactly what they were looking for.
-Apparently.
-Apparently?
That's all you've got to say?
Tell me, Merlin,
whose job is it to ensure
that my chambers
are locked at all times?
Whose job is it to ensure that
something like this never happens?
Sorry!
You're sorry?
That's not good enough.
-Did they force their way in?
-No, Sire.
Then how did they
gain access to the vault?
-They stole the keys.
-How is that possible?
Someone broke
into my chambers.
This is a grievous loss, Arthur.
The Crystal of Neahtid
was locked away for good reason.
-Why is it so important?
-It is an instrument of magic.
In the days of The Purge, a great many
sorcerers died trying to protect it.
Whatever it is,
it's important to them.
I'll search the town.
Find out what I can.
Arthur, this crystal cannot
fall into enemy hands.
Yes, Sire.
Arthur, thank you.
-For what exactly?
-For...
Lying to my father
to save your worthless hide?
-Yes.
-You ever put me in that position again,
I'll clap you in irons myself.
And, Merlin, you'd better hope
we find that crystal.
GAIUS:
Morgana stole the crystal?
I'm certain of it, I caught
her in Arthur's chambers.
She must have taken his keys.
-Can you prove any of this?
-Not exactly...
-Merlin...
-She did it. I'd bet my life on it.
Merlin, you are accusing
the King's ward without proof
-that's exactly what you'd be doing.
-I know. You're right.
It doesn't make sense.
Why would Morgana steal such a thing?
Uther said it was
an instrument of magic.
There are many legends
about the crystal.
-Is it some kind of weapon?
-That I don't know.
-You have heard of it?
-Indeed. Sorcerers of the past believed
it held the secret of time itself.
-What did they mean by that?
-I'm not sure.
The crystal is
an artifact of the Old Religion.
There is only one
that could tell you more.
- I need your help.
-I'm sure you do, young warlock.
But first, you must
honor your promise.
| said I would set you free
and I will!
-When?
-When I know that Camelot is safe.
-Please trust me.
-Why should I?
Because you
don't have a choice!
What is it that
you wish to know?
What is
the Crystal of Neahtid?
To those who know how to use it,
the crystal holds great knowledge.
-What kind of knowledge?
-The knowledge of what is,
what has been,
and what is yet to come.
Do you mean,
it can show you the future?
Amongst other things, yes.
-The crystal has been stolen.
-By whom?
The Lady Morgana.
(LAUGHS)
That witch does not have
the power to wield the crystal.
-Does the Druid boy?
-Mordred? It is possible.
Why do you ask?
| believe they are involved
in this together.
Once before I warned you
of the Druid boy.
It is his destiny
to bring about Arthur's doom.
-It may be that time is upon you.
-What do you mean?
The ancient prophecies
speak of an alliance
of Mordred and Morgana,
united in evil.
But this union
must be stopped.
Whatever the cost.
-Thank you, Gwen. That will be all.
-Nearly done.
-It's fine, Gwen. You can go.
-It won't take a moment...
| said you can go!
My Lady.
(HORSE NEIGHING)
Morgana!
It is my hope that, with time,
Mordred will master the crystal.
And when he does,
we will strike Uther down.
Uther and all who serve him.
-All who serve him?
-If we are to win this war,
there can be no half measures.
| see this troubles you.
Yes. Yes, it does.
My Lady, we fight
for our very survival. As do you.
The boy,
he told me you have magic.
-You need not be afraid.
-I know.
I'm sorry I have become so
used to concealing the truth.
Believe me,
| understand what that feels like.
Every day
| must look Uther in the eye.
Knowing that if
he were to discover who I really am
he would have me killed.
You have been very brave.
| don't want to be brave,
| just want to be myself.
| don't want to
be alone anymore.
You are not alone.
You are here with us.
You need never be alone again.
| must be heading back.
The castle will
be waking soon.
Farewell then,
my Lady Morgana.
-Where is Morgana?
-She could not stay.
-Will we be seeing her again?
-Yes, Mordred, you can be sure of that.
Nicely done.
You played her well.
It was not hard.
She is very beautiful after all.
-Alvarr has a fearsome reputation.
-You know of him?
| know he is a sorcerer and he
and his band of renegades
-have threatened to overthrow the King.
-He sounded determined.
He is a fanatic. And his
supporters follow him unthinkingly.
-Blinded by his charisma.
-Well, it worked on Morgana.
-So it would seem.
-And the Druid boy.
Alvarr's using him, too.
He seems to think the boy can harness
the power of the crystal.
We can't let this happen, Merlin.
But if we can't go to Uther
what can we do?
We can bend
the truth a little.
You know the whereabouts
of the crystal?
| believe so, Sire.
| see.
How did you come by this information?
In my capacity as physician,
| have dealings
with many different people.
They hear things, Sire,
and they see things.
Last night I was confronted
by one such man.
He told me
that the crystal had been stolen
by a band of renegades,
led by a man called Alvarr.
Who exactly was
this informant?
| think it would only be fair
to protect their identity, Sire.
If news of their betrayal
were to reach the renegades,
-it could indeed endanger their life.
-Very well.
-Where is this Alvarr hiding?
-He was last seen
in the Valley of Chemary, Sire.
Summon the guards, Arthur.
| want this matter
investigated without delay!
-Yes, Father.
-UTHER: Thank you, Gaius.
Once again I am in your debt.
Arthur, you're not seriously thinking
of going on this mission, are you?
No, I'm not thinking of going,
| am going on this mission.
-But you're chasing nothing but a rumor.
-True.
But for now it's the only lead
we have to go on.
You'll be wasting your time,
| assure you.
-Morgana, I never knew you cared.
-What are you talking about?
| can look after myself,
you know.
It's a combination of
raw talent
and hard training that makes me...
Yes, I know.
That makes you so utterly obnoxious.
Gaius had better
be right about this.
(GASPS)
-Morgana? What brings you here?
-Alvarr.
Arthur's been sent
to capture the crystal.
The Knights of Camelot
are almost upon us.
-How has this happened?
- I don't know.
| only know that
we've been betrayed.
-How much time do we have?
-An hour. Maybe two.
-I cannot say for sure.
-Then we must be prepared for them.
What can I do to help?
You can flee
while you still have the chance.
Morgana, I am grateful
for all that you have done.
But a battlefield
is no place for you.
| don't know why I bring
you on these expeditions.
-You spend the whole time terrified.
-I'm not terrified.
-Yes, you are. I can tell you are.
-No, you can't.
If you weren't scared,
you'd be talking rubbish as usual.
Well, I am talking rubbish as usual.
| mean, I am talking as usual.
So, clearly, I'm not scared.
-Where now?
-No idea.
| thought you said Gaius
gave you directions.
He did, he...
He just didn't tell me about this part.
Merlin, this is your fault.
If you'd just guarded the keys
to the vault...
MORDRED: They're coming!
They're coming!
They're coming! The crystal.
-Warn the others!
-ARTHUR: Merlin! I'm talking to you!
Warn the others. Warn the others.
The crystal! Warn the others.
-They're coming!
-What are you doing?
-The renegade camp...
-They're coming. Hurry!
-It's that way.
-And you know this because?
| know it because of...
| give up.
Because of this!
So it's a footprint.
Who says it belongs to a renegade?
There's more.
Follow me.
(SOFTLY) I told you.
Didn't I tell you?
Wait, what are you doing?
Well, whoever was here,
they're not here anymore.
Yes, they are.
-(ARROW SWOOSHING)
-(GROANING)
Take cover!
(MEN SHOUTING)
(GROANS)
Run, Mordred!
(GRUNTS)
(SOLDIERS SCREAMING)
MORDRED: I shall never
forgive this, Emrys,
and I shall never forget.
(GRUNTS)
-Give me the crystal.
-Why should you care?
What use is it to you?
You are a fool!
How many lives have been lost
this day, and for what?
You cannot wield the crystal.
You do not have the power.
None of you do!
ARTHUR: Merlin, check that the horses
are fed and watered.
-Merlin?
-Sorry?
-Not the right answer.
-What?
-Something on your mind, is there?
-It's just
when we entered the camp,
it was a trap, wasn't it?
-They knew we were coming.
-Yeah, so?
-How did they know?
-They're sorcerers, aren't they?
Probably used magic,
or something.
Now, I need you
to guard this with your life.
-Why me?
-I can't hardly very well guard it
-while I'm asleep, can 1?
-Neither can I.
Who said anything
about you sleeping?
(SOLDIERS SNORING)
So you admit to stealing
the Crystal of Neahtid?
| do.
You admit to plotting
against your King?
| do.
And you acted alone?
You were not aided, or abetted
by any citizen of Camelot?
| acted
alone.
Then I find you
guilty of treason.
You are an enemy of Camelot, Alvarr.
You are sentenced to death.
Then I die with honor!
To be an enemy of Camelot
IS no crime!
-Take him away.
-You, Uther!
You are the criminal!
How many more must you Kill
before you are satisfied?
He was guilty. He confessed his crimes.
You heard him as well as I.
His only crime
was to defy you.
Why are you defending this man?
He is a sworn foe of Camelot.
You know this.
Is it any wonder
he wanted you dead?
You who have persecuted his kind,
day after day, year after year.
- I will hear no more of this, Morgana!
-'Cause you are an arrogant fool!
You were deaf and blind
to the very needs of the people
you profess to serve and protect.
People will tolerate it no longer.
-I said enough!
-They're rising up against you.
From this day forward,
| do not know you.
| disown you.
You will go to your chambers!
And you, Uther,
you will go to hell.
(DOOR SHUTS)
Merlin?
-Is something interesting in there?
-Sorry?
-What's the matter?
-It's the crystal.
-It harbors a terrible power, Gaius.
-But it's locked away now.
It can do no harm.
Unless the damage
has already been done.
| held it. I knew I shouldn't.
| knew no good would come of it,
but it compelled me to look.
| couldn't resist it.
| saw things. Terrible things.
Then you've already
paid the price.
What I saw has not yet come to pass
and I am scared, Gaius.
| am really scared
of what the future may hold.
There is nothing on this Earth
that can know all possible futures.
-Even the crystal...
-But what I saw, it was so real.
And it was real,
but it was just one reality.
The future is as yet unshaped.
It is we that shape it.
It is you, Merlin.
The decisions you make,
the actions you take.
Remember that.
Now eat your soup
before it gets cold.
Gwen, could I have
my sleeping draft?
| didn't think you
needed it anymore.
Last night,
the nightmares returned.
Sleep well.
Please, this is not an official visit.
I'd like to see the prisoner, if I may.
Sorry, my Lady,
the prisoner is to see no one.
King's orders.
That doesn't apply
to the King's ward, surely?
Thank you. This might help
to ease the long night ahead.
My Lady,
| was not expecting you.
| have come to say goodbye.
It was gracious of you
to think of me.
It will not be easy, but you must
prepare yourself for what lies ahead.
| am prepared.
| have done what I can
to ease your passage.
| could not ask for more.
Good luck.
-My thoughts will be with you.
-Thank you, my Lady.
(CHANTING)
(GUARDS SNORING)
(GUARD GROANING)
(BELLS TOLLING)
ARTHUR:
We've searched the citadel, the town,
-every corner of Camelot.
-But he's gone.
-Yes, Father.
-How? How has he escaped?
ARTHUR:
It appears that the guards were drugged.
That means he had help.
Someone here in Camelot.
I'm afraid it looks that way.
Let this be understood.
Whoever has done this,
they have betrayed me.
They have
betrayed the Kingdom.
If I ever discover who it was,
they will rue
the day they were born.
DRAGON: Merlin!
I'm waiting, Merlin!
You gave your word!
Now set me free!
Merlin! Merlin!
When The fires of Idirsholas
burn the Knights
of Medhir will ride again.
It must be the work of magic.
(HORSES NEIGHING)
DRAGON: Camelot's end is nigh
and there's nothing you can do about it.
(SCREAMS)